# Worker Cooperatives and Socialism
Jeff Elkner *January 8, 2022*

---

## The Big Question

* What do we socialists mean when we talk about worker's control of the means
  of production?
* How do we think producers (workers) will exercise their democratic contol over
  the means of social reproduction?
* Answering this question is essentially answering the question, *What does
  socialism look like?*

---

## Picking Up Where Previous Socialist Projects Left Off

To quote Richard Wolff:

* Traditional socialisms abandoned efforts at democratizing enterprise
  structures and reverted to the employer-employee model of organization.

* Thus a genuinely socialized enterprise as the economic foundation of
  production went missing.

* Promoting and building democratic worker coops is motivated by the need to
  respond to this missing economic foundation.

---

## What Are Worker Cooperatives?

According to [Democracy at Work Institute](https://institute.coop/what-worker-cooperative), a **worker cooperative** is "a values-driven business that puts
worker and community benefit at the core of its purpose."

### Two central characteristics of worker cooperatives

* workers own the business and participate in its financial success on the
  basis of their labor contribution.
* workers have representation on and vote for the board of directors under the
  one worker, one vote principle.

---

## What Are Platform Companies and Why Should You Care About Them?

* *Platform companies* are companies which use *apps* (networked applications)
  to connect consumers to goods and services. 
* Platform companies currently comprise 7 of the 10 largest companies in the
  world resulting from 119 billion dollars investmented in them.
* US platform companies comprise 26% of global total and 5 largest of these
  (Google, Amazon, Facebook, Apple, and Microsoft) have a combined market
  capitalization of 2.7 trillion dollars.
* Given their economic power and reach, it should be obvious why we need to
  care about them.

---

## Platform Cooperatives as a Worker Protecting Alternative

* We live in an increasingly *platform economy* and that is only going to
  become more so, so we must figure out how to deal with it.
* Under current neo-liberal platform economy rules, workers are not employees,
  but independent contractors, who have no protections.
* By making the workers owners, *platform cooperatives* could provide one
  alternative way to protect the rights of workers.
* For more on this topic, watch
  [All Things Co-op: Platform Cooperatives with Minsun Ji](https://breadtube.tv/democracyatwork/all-things-co-op-platform-cooperatives-with-minsun-ji/).

---

## What Did Marx Have to Say About Worker Cooperatives?

* In an excellent article, [With or without class: Resolving Marx's
  Janus-faced interpretation of worker-owned
  cooperatives](https://www.academia.edu/39609495/With_or_without_class_Resolving_Marxs_Janus_faced_interpretation_of_worker_owned_cooperatives),
  Minsun Ji argues that "It is the nature of a labor institution's focus on
  developing and sustaining class consciousness, not the nature of the labor
  institution itself (i.e. cooperative or union), that Marx believed to most
  powerfully shape the radical or degenerative tendencies of local forms of
  labor activism.
* As revolutionary Marxists, we have a duty to use dialectical thinking, as Minsun
  Ji does, to deepen our understanding of this crucial question for our current
  economy in order to march at the front of the working class struggle.

---

## Let's Get To It! Next Step Questions

* Can we at Claudia Jones School play a leading role in helping organize the
  emerging worker coop movement in the DMV and moving it in a class struggle
  direction?
* Could we host a conference in May as a first step in this effort?
* Can we use this opportunity to deepen our political understanding of what
  socialism needs to look like in the 21st century?
* If you want to be part of this effort, please email me at the address
  provided in the chat. 
